Proposal Amendment: UTF-8 migration (#30)
prometheus/proposals: proposals/2023-11-13-utf8-migration.md

* A newer database receives names from an older client, which is later upgraded. In this case, older names might be escaped using the replace-with-underscores method, and newer names will be UTF-8.
* A newer database receives names from a mix of new and old clients, in which case the same block could contain munged and UTF-8 data representing the same intended names name.

At query time, there will be a problem: some data may be written with UTF-8 and other data was written with an escaping format.
The query code will not know which encoding to look for.
In order to ensure consistent querying, the backwards-compatibility design must account for these scenarios, making trade-offs when needed.

All of these situations can be summarized as follows:

1. Data written with old database code: all names are guaranteed not to be UTF-8.
2. Data written with new database code by new clients: all names are guaranteed to be UTF-8-compatible.
3. Data written with new database code by one or more old clients (and possibly new clients as well): No guarantees, some names could be escaped, others not.

### Proposed Solution

> To help alleviate this confusion we first propose to bump the version number in the tsdb meta.json file. On a per-block basis, the query code can check the version number and know if the data was written with an old version of the database code. This helps distinguish the first case.

Author: The version number bump indicates if the block was written by utf-capable prometheus, but it does not indicate if the clients sent utf8 metrics or pre-escaped metrics (or if the block contains a combination of both).

### Audience

The audience for this amendment are users that are planning to migrate existing Prometheus deployments to add support for UTF-8 metric and label names who want to ensure continuity in query behavior through the upgrade process.

## Non-Goals

We do not promise smooth accommodation of every edge case, especially pathological ones (see Name Collisions below).
In those instances, users may not be able to turn on UTF-8 support, or may need to rename metrics or labels.

## How

Given a query for a UTF-8 metric or label name, the tsdb will look for that name in on-disk blocks whether those blocks were written in native UTF-8 or either of two supported name-munging patterns.
Those series will be located even in cases when a single block has one metric written in more than one way.
The tsdb will know what versions of clients wrote those blocks based on a new entry in the meta.json.

### Mixed-Format Scenarios

We must consider edge cases in which a blocks database has persisted metrics or labels that may have been written by different client versions. There are multiple ways this can (and will) happen:

> * A newer client persists names to an older database version. In this case, names would be escaped with the U__ syntax.  If the database is upgraded, newer blocks will be written in UTF-8.

Reviewer: What do you mean by database upgrade? Do you mean a new Prometheus version?

Author: yes that's what I meant here, I can fix the language

Author: fixed

### Audience

The audience for this amendment are users that are planning to migrate existing Prometheus deployments to add support for UTF-8 metric and label names who want to ensure continuity in query behavior through the upgrade process.

## Non-Goals

We do not promise smooth accommodation of every edge case, especially pathological ones (see Name Collisions below).
In those instances, users may not be able to turn on UTF-8 support, or may need to rename metrics or labels.

## How

Given a query for a UTF-8 metric or label name, the tsdb will look for that name in on-disk blocks whether those blocks were written in native UTF-8 or either of two supported name-escaping patterns.
Those series will be located even in cases when a single block has one metric written in more than one way.
The tsdb will differentiate those blocks based on entries in the meta.json and a new flag.

### Mixed-Format Scenarios

We must consider edge cases in which a blocks database has persisted metrics or labels that may have been written by different client versions. There are multiple ways this can (and will) happen:

> * A newer client persists names to an older Prometheus version. In this case, names would be escaped with the U__ syntax.  If Prometheus is upgraded, newer blocks will be written in UTF-8.

Author: Yes we assume that they will do A. B seems unlikely... more likely they will just keep sending _ or `_dot_`. But I guess we should cover case B just in case.

* A newer Prometheus receives names from an older client, which is later upgraded. In this case, older names might be escaped using the replace-with-underscores method, and newer names will be UTF-8. This will often happen when Prometheus is receiving Open Telemetry metrics.
* A newer Prometheus receives names from a mix of new and old clients, in which case the same block could contain escaped and UTF-8 data representing the same intended names.

At query time, there will be a problem: some data may be written with UTF-8 and other data was written with an escaping format.
The query code will not know which encoding to look for.
In order to ensure consistent querying, the backwards-compatibility design must account for these scenarios, making trade-offs when needed.

All of these situations can be summarized as follows:

> 1. **Old Data** -- Data written with old Prometheus code: all names are guaranteed not to be UTF-8.

Reviewer 2: After having read through all the below, I would say what's meant here is "if at all, we will have escaped names, so we would never query for UTF-8 names, but only try out the specified escaping schemas".

Still, I think the difference to the mixed data case should be made clearer. 

In principle, there might be a scenario where the user knows for sure that they won't have any escaping at all, for example if they had a pure Prometheus stack so far (no OTel etc.), but they would like to use UTF-8 names, so they still have a period of mixed versions deployed (new and old producers, new and old ingesters). I guess it's fine to not implement a specific optimization for that use case (which would be that we don't need a broad search for the old blocks at all), but it would be good if that case is described and that we disregard it as an informed decision.

2. **Mixed Data** -- Data written with new Prometheus code by one or more old clients (and possibly new clients as well): No guarantees, some names could be escaped, others not.
3. **New Data** -- Data written with new Prometheus code by new clients: all names are guaranteed to be UTF-8-compatible.

### Time Scope

The issue of mixed-format blocks will persist for the retention period of the tsdb.
For some deployments this means only 14 days, for others it may be on the order of years of persisted old data.

### Proposed Solution

For queries to return correct data we must differentiate the three cases above, and to do that we first propose to bump the version number in the tsdb meta.json file.

> On a per-block basis, the query code can check the version number and know if the data was written with an old version of the Prometheus code.

Author: Yes I suppose the only real benefit is removing the UTF-8 query from the list of possibilities. The other escapings may all be possible. Do you think that maybe we don't need a version number bump at all and can just use the flag/date-based logic?

> On a per-block basis, the query code can check the version number and know if the data was written with an old version of the Prometheus code.

Reviewer 3: Yea, I am fine with both.

It feels like small change to bump version and might unlock some optimizations, so I am fine keeping this up, just wanted to clarify.

> On a per-block basis, the query code can check the version number and know if the data was written with an old version of the Prometheus code.

Reviewer 2: So yeah, I guess the only optimization is that we never have to run the original UTF-8 query on blocks with an older version. Not sure if that is worth the effort of versioning the blocks. But maybe, as @bwplotka said, the effort is actually quite low, and we might see additional uses of the version number later.

This helps distinguish the first case.

Secondly we will add two new flags to help define the range of dates that are affected by mixed blocks and will be used to distinguish the second case from the third.

> * `-promql.utf8_migration.enabled`: This flag tells Prometheus that a migration is in progress, meaning that blocks with the newer tsdb version number may be mixed. If this flag is false, blocks with the newer version number are understood to not be mixed and are exclusively UTF-8.

Reviewer 3: Nice!

Some suggestions:

1. Hm can we simplify the description? I am not sure if this feature has to block aware? It's essentially enabling PromQL engine to repeat metric lookups for different escaping techniques, depending on timeline, nothing else?

2. Also we could be more explicit with the flag name. Perhaps "promql.utf8_broad_lookup.(...)" would be more explicit?

3. Finally, I wonder if the next feature user would ask is to give option for what escaping techniques to lookup for. For many users e.g. not using DataDog it's clear we don't need to spend cycles on that escaping. To me this means boolean flag could be replaced with string array with some enum like`promql.utf8_broad_lookup.escape_formats`= "_", "U__", "DataDog" 🤔

```suggestion
* `-promql.utf8_broad_lookup.escape_formats`: This flag tells PromQL engine what escaping methods might have been previously used to escape UTF-8 characters. This is then used to transparently repeat series lookups for metric names or label names when UTF-8 characters are spotted, for each escaping format. Available values: ...
```

Author: I agree that essentially the logic is date-based, not block based, so yes that does get simpler. (Unless we keep the tsdb version bump.... but that does seem to add complexity).

Let's start with simple and see how the performance is

> * `-promql.utf8_migration.until=<date-time>`: This flag indicates the latest date-time (inclusive) for blocks that may contain mixed data. Any data after this moment are exclusively UTF-8.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `-promql.utf8_broad_lookup.until=<date-time>`: This flag indicates the latest date-time (inclusive) for blocks that may contain mixed data. Any data after this moment are exclusively UTF-8.
```

Perhaps?

Author: applying manually

> * `-promql.utf8_broad_lookup.until=<date-time>`: This flag indicates the latest date-time (inclusive) for blocks that may contain mixed data. Any data after this moment are exclusively UTF-8.

Reviewer 2: Maybe describe the default case? I guess the default ist "forever", but the flag only becomes effective once at least one escape format has been specified with the other flag.

#### Migration Timeline

A Prometheus migration to UTF-8 will follow this timeline:

1. Prometheus is upgraded and UTF-8 support enabled. The `-promql.utf8_broad_lookup.escape_formats` is turned on immediately, enabling the multi-lookup behavior and listing the possible escaping schemes.
2. Clients are gradually upgraded to UTF-8.

> 3. `-promql.utf8_migration.until` is set to the last date-time when a non-UTF-8 client sent data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. `-promql. utf8_broad_lookup.until` is set to the last date-time when a non-UTF-8 client sent data.
```

4. Wait for the retention period to elapse such that the migration-until date is expired (could be years).

> 5. The migration is complete. Remove `-promql.utf8_broad_lookup.escape_formats` and `-promql.utf8_migration.until` as they are no longer needed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. The migration is complete. Remove `-promql.utf8_broad_lookup.escape_formats` and `-promql. utf8_broad_lookup.until` as they are no longer needed.
```

### Querying Mixed Blocks

The last major challenge is correctly returning data for queries of blocks that contain mixed data.
For the mixed-format scenarios, at query time, we will look for **all possible** escapings of a name in order to locate the correct data.
We propose to do this by expanding a lookup for a UTF-8 metric or label name into a limited set of possible escapings:

1. **UTF-8**
2. **underscore-replaced**: All unsupported characters are converted to underscores.
3. **U__ escaping**:  As described in the UTF-8 proposal, strings with invalid characters can be escaped by prepending `U__` and replacing all invalid characters with `_[UTF8 value]_`.

> 4. **[Datadog proxy](https://github.com/grafana/mimir-proxies/blob/main/pkg/datadog/ddprom/naming.go#L30-L34) escaping pattern**: "`.`" becomes "`_dot_`" and "`_`" becomes "`__`".

Reviewer 2: The flag `-promql.utf8_broad_lookup.escape_formats` implies that the search is constrained to the escaping schemas given by the flags. This is mentioned below (in line 108). How about mentioning this up here, so that the reader will immediately understand that we don't have to brute-force all methods if only a few have been specified?

This approach was overly complicated and would require a lot of plumbing to make it work.
There were also potential issues with block compaction and trying to make sure that the metadata is merged correctly.
Ultimately we decided that having administrators declare transition dates was an easier approach.

### Rewrite Old Data

We could have required that users rewrite their tsdb blocks to "upgrade" them to UTF-8 and undo the escaping.
This approach seems tedious, difficult, and dangerous -- what if something goes wrong during rewriting?
Requiring massive data rewrites is not a reasonable ask of users.

### Lookup Table / Per-Name Config

We considered recording a lookup table or per-name configuration that would describe how UTF-8 metrics and labels might be stored in old data blocks.
This approach would be faster than doing query expansion, but would create extra operational overhead -- lookup tables would have to be correct and exhaustive.

Because names are stored in the index, query expansion is not expensive enough to justify the extra operational overhead.

### No Migration -- Write Both Versions

> We very briefly considered the idea of having the tsdb write all names for a name as long as the user configured it that way.

Reviewer 2: names for a name → versions of a name
